---
layout: post
title: Optimizing Operation Room Scheduling - A Pyomo Solver Approach
description: 
image: assets/images/pic19.jpg
---

Efficient operation room scheduling is crucial for maximizing patient throughput and resource utilization in healthcare facilities. With the increasing complexity of scheduling scenarios, an automated optimization approach becomes essential. In this article, we explore the application of Pyomo Solver's concrete model to optimize the scheduling of operation rooms in a healthcare provider facility. By formulating the problem as an optimization model, we can aim to maximize the number of scheduled procedures while considering various constraints.

To delve deeper into the analysis, and check the methodology and results, please visit the accompanying <a href="https://github.com/placenciohid/Resume/blob/main/Pyomo%20Optimization%20-%20Operating%20Room%20Schedule.ipynb"><b>Jupiter notebook</b></a>.

<h3>Pyomo Solver and Concrete Model</h3>

Pyomo Solver is a powerful optimization modeling language for mathematical programming in Python. Its concrete model feature allows us to define and solve optimization problems using a declarative approach. This approach offers a high-level and intuitive representation of the problem, making it easier to formulate and solve complex scheduling problems.

<h3>Defining the Problem</h3>

The objective is to optimize the schedule of operation rooms in a healthcare facility over a three-month period. We aim to maximize the number of procedures that can be scheduled within this timeframe. The optimization model considers the available operating rooms, surgical procedures represented by their CPT codes, and estimated procedure durations (Booked Time). The goal is to efficiently allocate procedures to operating rooms, respecting constraints such as room availability and procedure compatibility.

<h3>Implementation</h3>

Using Pyomo's concrete model, we define decision variables, an objective function, and constraints. Decision variables represent the scheduling assignments of procedures to operating rooms at specific time slots. The objective function aims to maximize the number of scheduled procedures. Constraints ensure the feasibility of the schedule by enforcing limitations such as total booked time per day and per operating room.

<h3>Solving the Mode</h3>

With the formulation complete, we apply a solver (e.g., GLPK) to find the optimal solution that maximizes the number of scheduled procedures while adhering to the defined constraints. The results are presented in a tabular format, displaying essential details such as the Encounter ID, operating room, day, hour, booked time, and end time for each scheduled procedure.

<h3>Benefits and Conclusions</h3>

The Pyomo Solver and its concrete model provide a robust framework for optimizing operation room scheduling in healthcare facilities. By automating the scheduling process, we enhance resource utilization and improve operational efficiency. The flexibility of Pyomo allows us to handle diverse constraints and objectives, enabling customization to specific healthcare facility requirements.

In conclusion, utilizing Pyomo Solver's concrete model offers a reliable and efficient approach to optimize the scheduling of operation rooms. By maximizing the number of scheduled procedures while considering constraints, healthcare facilities can improve patient care, streamline operations, and enhance resource utilization. This optimization methodology contributes to overall operational excellence and positively impacts the quality of healthcare services provided.